---
layout: post
title:      "Northwind Database"
date:       2019-05-16 17:37:12 +0000
permalink:  northwind_database
---

Using a fictional company database, I was asked to assess different questions that could shed light on sale information that could be used to increase profitability. SQL was used throughout the project to retrieve relevant information from the database so that we could use different statistical analysis techniques to answer our questions with some degree of confidence.

The first question we wanted to answer was whether discounts had a statistically significant effect on the number of products customers order. The information that seemed relevant from the database included the quantity of products purchased, and the discounts applied to each purchase. We did a rough exploration of the data, cleaning it of any null values and manipulating the data in ways that could better help us answer this question. We were able to distinguish the different discounting schemes and their general profitability and felt confident our data was usable. We set out by defining our null and alternative hypothesis of whether or not there is a difference in ordering history between discounted and non-discounted orders. Using a two-sample t-test, under an assumption of normality, we were able to reject our null hypothesis with a p-value < 0.001 and an alpha value of 0.05 and conclude there indeed was a difference. Thus we inquired as to whether each individual discount level we previously discovered before had more or less of an influence on these orders compared to each other. This time, defining this as a null and alternative hypothesis and testing it with a two-sample t-test, we failed to reject the null hypothesis proven by a p-value of 0.61 – showing the amount of a discount had little to no effect compared to having a discount to begin with. A good business move would be to reduce the amount of higher level discounts available, keeping the relative amount of orders the same yet increasing the revenue.

The second question we asked built off the premise of the first. If discounted orders held influence over order quantity, would there be a difference in sale revenue between these discounted and non discounted orders? More information would be needed from the database provided, this time using SQL we retrieved not only the quantity and discount information, but the pricing per unit as well. Cleaning the data and manipulating it we were able to calculate total order price per purchase, a key feature in answering sale revenue. We established a null and alternative hypothesis around our question and again performed a two-sample t-test after transforming our data to represent a more normal distribution. Our calculation resulted in a p-value of 0.10, failing to reject the null hypothesis. Thus our conclusion stood that there was no statistically significant difference in sale between discounted and non discounted orders.

The third question asked if there are different sale trends observed on different months of the year. To answer this question we retrieved order date and quantity information and visualized the difference in sales per month. A quick observation couldn’t help us determine whether or not our null hypothesis that there is no difference can be rejected our not, so we used the one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) to determine if there are any statistically significant differences between each month. Assuming a normal distribution, our results were a p-value of 0.04 with an alpha value of 0.05. With this information we could reject our null hypothesis and accept the alternative, that there was a difference in sales between months. Although our p-value was <0.05, our r-squared value for our OLS regression was .009. This tells us that although our model isn’t good at making accurate predictions because of unexplained variance (understandable given the limit of the information we are testing with), we can be reasonably sure that our predictor has an effect on the dependent variable. Furthermore, inspecting the exact p-values of each month, we see months like May and August yielding p-values that reject our null hypothesis while the others don't. Increasing inventory or promoting products more during these months could lead to increased sales.

The final question we asked was whether or not there was a difference in spending per order between regions. Extracting the regional data; as well as order quantity, unit price, and discount information like before, we’re able to sort the order details by their source of origin. Graphing this data shows that although Western Europe has the greatest number of orders and sales, the average sale per order is similar regardless of region. A quick transformation of the data to normalize the information before testing it with ANOVA revealed this to be true with a p-value of 0.37. We failed to reject our null hypothesis and we can assume there is no difference between average spending per order per region. Although this was the case, the exploration of the dataset through this angle hinted that there is a bigger market in overall sales coming from Western Europe, as opposed to any other region. This information can be explored further in a future analysis.


