---
layout: post
title:      "My Data Science Journey"
date:       2019-09-03 05:17:06 +0000
permalink:  my_data_science_journey
---


As I near the end of my flatiron data science program, I spent some time evaluating what I learned. Looking back on the last couple of months, long nights debugging my code or even longer days trying to understand how a certain topic worked the way it did; there is more that I draw from this experience than just the material provided to me. 
At the beginning of my journey, each day yielded a lesson I was expected to familiarize myself with fairly quickly. We would move at a lesson a day pace, so it was easy to fall behind. Learning to learn was one of the most important lessons I can look back upon, but it wasn’t an easy one. Throughout our lives we are tasked with gaining information and relaying it in different mediums—homework, tests, projects. When we are taught new information, its easy to feel lost. Just as easily we can feel overconfident with the material. Throughout the course I tested myself beyond the labs and the projects. By introducing new material not sculptured with the homework assigned in mind, whether in different reading material or online exercises, I trained my brain to seek out edge case scenarios to stretch and twist my understanding of the material. Not only would this further solidify what I was learning, it truly tested if I knew what I was telling myself I knew. 
Seeking out exercises was a perfect introduction to how to go about learning more difficult material. I was introduced to different resources that not only supplemented the flatiron material, but also attacked the concept from different angles. Going through the course material, not everything is taught at the same caliber throughout. And on an individual basis, there are some concepts that are generally more difficult to grasp to different people. By using the resources that supplemented the material taught, less time was spent trying to understand the same written material over and over, when instead multiple avenues and mediums were able to piece together a better picture of the material at hand.
Due to the intensity of the curriculum, time was a very important factor throughout. Making a schedule every week, incorporating what material you planned to learn and also the break and time off you set aside for yourself. Efficiency didn’t come with doing everything as fast as possible and completing every daily task in order. Creating a system of recognizing what was difficult to study, moving on to complete more simple concepts, and then coming back to those more difficult topics was a great strategy when it came to learning. 
Balance was the last important factor to consider whilst going through my data science program. The intensity of this course required so much focus and time that it was apparent early that without making time for yourself, you’d quickly experience burnout. That’s why as difficult or even as intriguing as the material may get, taking half an hour off to yourself would be enough to rejuvenate your mind. I would also close the books and spend time out with family and friends during the weekend, anything that would help allow me to step away from the course material for a moment before jumping back in, with a fresh mind. 
Moving forward, I am prepared for whatever is needed to be done to succeed. The lessons I learned throughout this course not only taught me how to succeed these last few months, but also how to strive along my journey for years to come. 

